Asset Price Levels and Volatility: Causes and Implications

[SECTION]

The variability of real activity and inflation in the United States 
        has declined substantially since the mid-1980s--a development often termed 
        the Great Moderation. During roughly the same period, equity valuations 
        have risen, and term premiums for fixed-income assets have fallen. The 
        obvious question is whether these real economy and financial market phenomena 
        are measurably related. Put differently, has less-variable real activity 
        helped increase the value of financial assets, as some have claimed? It 
        is certainly possible to see how such a link might occur. If perceived 
        to be persistent over sufficiently long periods of time, greater economic 
        stability could support higher asset prices by reducing risk premiums 
        on financial assets. It is also plausible that more stability in output 
        and inflation could lead to lower volatility in financial asset prices.

[SECTION]

In my remarks today, I want to discuss what researchers are uncovering 
        about the links between the volatility of real activity and asset prices. 
        As a monetary policy maker, I am interested in these links because the 
        prices of financial assets affect the spending decisions of firms and 
        households and because these prices may reveal forward-looking information 
        relevant for setting policy. In addition, I want to discuss changes in 
        financial markets themselves that may contribute to asset price volatility. 
        Before proceeding, I must indicate that the views I am about to express 
        are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of 
        the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.

[SECTION]

The volatility of GDP has fallen while equity prices have risen
        A number of researchers have documented that the volatility of economic 
        activity has moderated since the mid-1980s (Kim and Nelson, 1999; McConnell 
        and Perez-Quiros, 2000). Moreover, the decline does not appear to be the 
        result of a long-term downward trend but appears to conform more to a 
        structural break around the mid-1980s. The moderation is substantial: 
        The standard deviation of the quarterly growth rate of real gross domestic 
        product from 1985 to 2004--about 2.1 percent--is only about one-half its 
        standard deviation from 1960 to 1984. Similar-sized declines in volatility 
        have been evident in many of the components of GDP, including consumption 
        and residential investment, and also in inflation. Declines have also 
        occurred in the volatility of business investment and corporate profits, 
        but these declines have been more modest.

[SECTION]

A variety of explanations for this Great Moderation have been put forth, 
        and each has garnered some empirical support. First, the U.S. economy 
        might have been lucky, and the shocks to the economy have been milder 
        than in the past (Stock and Watson, 2002; Ahmed, Levin and Wilson, 2004). 
        Another explanation is that firms may have adopted information technologies 
        that allow them to more efficiently manage their inventories (Kahn, McConnell, 
        and Perez-Quiros, 2002), thus limiting destabilizing imbalances and rectifying 
        them more quickly when they arise. Better conduct of monetary policy could 
        also lead to lower inflation and economic volatility (see, for example, 
        Clarida, Gali, and Gertler, 2000; and Romer and Romer, 2002). Finally, 
        financial innovations, such as risk-based loan pricing and expanded securitization, 
        may have enhanced the ability of households to borrow, which would make 
        them less sensitive to fluctuations in income (Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel, 
        2005).

[SECTION]

Importantly, equity valuation, as measured by the price-earnings ratio 
        of the S&P 500, has been higher in the past two decades than in the 
        two decades before that. The price-earnings ratio averaged 14 from 1960 
        to 1984 and rose to an average of 19 over 1985-2004. The average since 
        1984 falls only slightly, to 18, if we exclude the late 1990s and 2000, 
        when valuations reached record levels. The rise in equity valuations at 
        the same time that macroeconomic volatility fell is circumstantial evidence 
        of a link between the two.

[SECTION]

Interest rates also could potentially have been affected by the Great 
        Moderation. Investors in Treasury bonds require a risk (or term) premium 
        to compensate them for the risk of loss on longer-maturity bonds resulting 
        from movements in interest rates. Term premiums could be lower when inflation 
        expectations are well anchored or the macroeconomy is less volatile. Ongoing 
        research by Board staff suggests a notable downward trend in term premiums 
        since 1990 (Kim and Wright, 2005). This secular decline in term premiums 
        since 1990 appears to be correlated with the decline in long-run inflation 
        uncertainty and in short-term interest rate uncertainty.

[SECTION]

Does volatility of real activity affect the level of asset prices? 
        
        Now, I would like to explore some of the research that might explain whether 
        and, if so, how the Great Moderation affected the level of asset prices. 
        Structural models of asset prices provide a consistent framework for understanding 
        both equity prices and interest rates. In these models, each asset price 
        contains a risk premium that represents the additional return demanded 
        by risk-averse investors for bearing risk. A reduction in macroeconomic 
        volatility that reduces uncertainty about earnings or dividends could 
        reduce the equity risk premium and, as a result, lead to higher equity 
        prices. Less uncertainty about future inflation could lower the risk premiums 
        on nominal Treasury bonds, lowering the risk-free interest rate. There 
        is, however, a potential offset as well. Lower volatility may reduce the 
        motive for precautionary savings and thus put upward pressure on interest 
        rates and, all else equal, downward pressure on equities.

[SECTION]

One recent paper has directly examined whether the recent decline in 
        economic volatility contributed to a lower long-run equity premium and 
        the steep run-up in stock prices in the late 1990s (Lettau, Ludvigson, 
        and Wachter, 2005). This model supposes that investors learn about the 
        new, low-volatility regime only gradually. The researchers estimate that 
        investors revised up the probability of being in a low-volatility regime 
        starting in the early 1990s. This revision, if perceived to be persistent, 
        could explain the magnitude of the decline in the long-run equity premium 
        in the late 1990s. However, one concern that has been raised about this 
        model is that it does not also address the behavior of interest rates 
        over the past decade.

[SECTION]

Some other studies address the effect of macroeconomic volatility on 
        both stock prices and the risk-free interest rate. However, the focus 
        of these papers is not explicitly on a downward shift in volatility, as 
        implied by the Great Moderation, but instead on a temporary drop in volatility 
        that is eventually reversed. These papers find that lower volatility leads 
        to higher interest rates and a lower equity premium, but the net effect 
        on stock prices depends on how the researchers choose to model investors' 
        risk and savings preferences (see, for example, Bansal and Yaron, 2004; 
        Bekaert, Engstrom, and Xing 2005). Ongoing research by Board staff members 
        (Bekaert, Engstrom and Xing 2005) suggests that when a more flexible specification 
        for investor preferences is adopted, macro volatility has little net effect 
        on stock prices. That is, this research finds that the downward pressure 
        of the higher interest rates on equity prices roughly offsets the upward 
        pressure of a lower equity premium.

[SECTION]

The effect of a reduction in the variability of inflation, rather than 
        output, on equity premiums has also been examined. Against the backdrop 
        of a long-term downward trend in the equity premium, from unusually high 
        levels in the late 1930s and 1940s, Blanchard (1993) shows that year-to-year 
        moves in the equity premium are correlated with changes in inflation. 
        In particular, lower deviations of inflation from past trends are correlated 
        with lower-than-average equity premiums, an indication that the decline 
        in the volatility of inflation is a factor behind the observed decline 
        in the equity premium in the 1980s.

[SECTION]

In short, although the data are suggestive, tests based on asset pricing 
        models have not firmly established an empirical link between reduced macroeconomic 
        volatility and higher asset prices. The ability to establish such a link 
        is limited, in part because many of the fundamental concepts underlying 
        asset prices, such as risk aversion and expected volatility of growth, 
        are difficult to measure and the model outcomes depend greatly on assumptions 
        regarding these key variables.

[SECTION]

Does volatility of real activity affect the volatility of asset 
        prices? 
        I would like to turn now from the level of asset prices to their volatility. 
        In brief, evidence of a decline in this volatility is scarce. For S&P 
        500 returns, the annualized standard deviation was 13.2 percent over 1985-2004, 
        about matching the 12.9 percent figure over 1960-84. For the ten-year 
        Treasury bond, the annualized standard deviation of interest rate changes 
        was 1.1 percentage points over 1985-2004, down only slightly from 1.4 
        percentage points over 1960-84. These data indicate clearly that the Great 
        Moderation of volatility in GDP and many of its components has not carried 
        over to the volatility of asset prices.

[SECTION]

To better understand what could appear to be an anomaly, a theoretical 
        framework is helpful. Asset price volatility can be decomposed into two 
        pieces--one that depends on the volatility of future cash flows and one 
        that depends on the volatility of the discount rate applied to those cash 
        flows. For the stock market, the relevant cash flows might be thought 
        of as dividends or earnings, and the discount rate would be the sum of 
        the real risk-free interest rate and the equity risk premium. Research 
        has suggested that the variation in dividends or earnings accounts for 
        no more than one-fourth of stock market volatility, whereas variation 
        in the discount rate accounts for the bulk of the volatility.

[SECTION]

Recent research by Board staff members (Campbell, 2005) has shown that 
        the volatility of investors' forecasts of future corporate earnings or 
        dividends has declined substantially, which would tend to lower the volatility 
        of stock prices. However, this paper also showed that the volatility of 
        the discount rate, which historically has been the main driver of stock 
        market volatility, has not declined. This result could arise if the volatility 
        of investors' risk aversion is independent of macroeconomic volatility, 
        as would be consistent with asset pricing models that are based on habit 
        formation (Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). Other researchers (Bekaert, Engstrom, 
        and Xing, 2005) also find evidence consistent with this hypothesis. Another 
        reason why the volatility of discount rates may not have fallen is that 
        investors learn only gradually about changes in macro volatility and thus 
        have greater uncertainty about the current volatility regime. Alternatively, 
        investors may fear that volatility will revert back to a higher level 
        in the future. The bottom line is that some big questions remain unanswered 
        and that this topic remains very much an active area of research.

[SECTION]

Volatility of asset prices may also be affected by changes in 
        financial markets 
        So far I have focused on how macroeconomic volatility can affect asset 
        prices. I have argued that observable macroeconomic variables, such as 
        the volatility of news about future earnings or the volatility of macroeconomic 
        factors, such as consumption, can explain only a fraction of the asset 
        price volatility that we observe. At this point, it seems sensible to 
        look elsewhere to try to explain asset price volatility. Microeconomic 
        factors seem like the logical next place to look.

[SECTION]

The microeconomic factor I want to focus on is the greater effect of 
        market liquidity on asset prices. The liquidity of financial markets has 
        expanded significantly in recent years, to the great benefit of many segments 
        of our economy. As liquidity has grown, some of the volatility we have 
        seen in asset prices may be related to shifts in market liquidity. Some 
        believe that liquidity may now be a more significant factor in three particular 
        areas: financial innovations that enable a wider range of risks to be 
        traded, the trading behavior of large investors, and the growing role 
        of hedge funds.

[SECTION]

Financial engineering has produced many innovations that enable risks 
        to be unbundled and dispersed throughout the financial system. For example, 
        the new technologies of securitization and credit derivatives help banks 
        better manage their exposure to credit risk by offloading some of their 
        risk to institutional investors who appear to be more willing and able 
        to bear it. Dispersing risk widely creates a more resilient financial 
        system, which in turn allows the economy to better weather disruptions. 
        High-profile defaults in recent years, such as those of Enron, WorldCom, 
        Parmalat, and Delphi, have not caused financial distress among large financial 
        institutions or disrupted the supply of credit to the nonfinancial sector 
        in any noticeable way.

[SECTION]

Some people have argued, however, that because these financial innovations 
        rely on market liquidity, they impose costs by increasing asset price 
        volatility when demands for liquidity are unusually high. For example, 
        some blame the stock market crash of 1987, either wholly or in part, on 
        portfolio insurance strategies practiced by some market participants at 
        that time. Likewise, some have blamed past bouts of volatility in fixed-income 
        markets partly on investors who dynamically hedge the prepayment risk 
        of mortgage-backed securities.

[SECTION]

It seems clear that large and sudden changes in asset prices can occur 
        when market participants do not sufficiently consider liquidity. Fortunately, 
        however, recent episodes have served as painful lessons for some market 
        participants of the need to actively manage market liquidity risk. For 
        example, swaps dealers now routinely estimate mortgage-related hedging 
        flows to try to anticipate the changes in liquidity that could accompany 
        swings in mortgage prepayment risk.

[SECTION]

Effectively managing market liquidity risk can limit the effects on 
        asset price volatility. Market participants have learned that lesson and 
        have strong incentives to manage liquidity risk by means that include 
        the stress-testing of their portfolios with scenarios such as a sudden 
        absence of liquidity in key markets. It is, in my judgment, important 
        for supervisors to reinforce that incentive and encourage more institutions 
        to conduct such stress tests.

[SECTION]

Recent research at the Federal Reserve Board sheds some light on how 
        liquidity conditions can be influenced by the trading behavior of large 
        investors and can, in turn, affect asset price volatility (Pritsker, 2005). 
        The research shows that the presence of large investors can affect market 
        price dynamics if they become forced sellers. Specifically, forced sales 
        by large investors can temporarily cause assets to be mispriced, no longer 
        reflecting long-run fundamentals, past pricing relationships to break 
        down, and liquidity factors to take on importance for asset pricing. The 
        results of this research would appear to be relevant to our thinking about 
        markets dominated by large investors. However, this finding merely reinforces 
        the earlier comment that all investors need to consider liquidity risk 
        carefully, and it puts a special focus on the class of large investors 
        that has emerged in the last decade as the financial sector has undergone 
        a period of consolidation and growth.

[SECTION]

No discussion of liquidity and volatility would be complete without 
        a mention of hedge funds. Hedge funds have grown rapidly in recent years: 
        Assets under management are estimated to have grown from $50 billion in 
        1993 to $600 billion in 2003 and close to $1 trillion today. However, 
        with 8,000 hedge funds in existence, according to industry estimates, 
        the average size of a hedge fund is less than $120 million. Therefore, 
        few, if any, hedge funds seem to be of systemic scale. Hedge funds provide 
        valuable liquidity and reduce the mispricing of financial assets that 
        might occur across markets, making markets more efficient. They appear 
        to have an advantage over other market participants in the provision of 
        these services because they have more-flexible investment strategies and 
        can adapt quickly to changing market opportunities.

[SECTION]

Some observers are concerned that the features of hedge funds that promote 
        liquidity and efficient pricing might also contribute to higher asset 
        price volatility. One concern along these lines is that sudden withdrawals 
        by investors could force hedge funds to sell into a falling market. Of 
        course, this is a risk that hedge fund managers have an incentive to manage 
        by taking into account the liquidity of both their assets and their liabilities. 
        One tool that hedge funds appear to actively use when managing this risk 
        is lock-up periods on investors' capital. Therefore, this concern seems 
        misplaced, in my assessment.

[SECTION]

A second concern is that excessive leverage at hedge funds could lead 
        their counterparties to close out their positions in the event of an adverse 
        shock, again potentially increasing volatility. Sound credit-risk management 
        by hedge fund counterparties is important for effectively addressing this 
        risk, and supervisors are promoting such techniques among the institutions 
        they oversee. Although these institutions have made progress at improving 
        their management of hedge fund credit risk, some work remains to be done, 
        but the counterparties of hedge funds are undertaking that work.

[SECTION]

Finally, some hedge funds do appear at times to crowd into niche markets 
        to exploit mispricings, and their actions have occasionally caused price 
        volatility in those niches to rise. However, this behavior would be expected 
        to self-correct as the overcrowded trades produce low returns that disappoint 
        hedge fund investors. In any case, price volatility in niche markets poses 
        little danger of systemic risk as long as other market participants manage 
        their exposure to such events prudently.

[SECTION]

Summary and lessons for policymakers
        To sum up, macroeconomic volatility has declined over the past two decades. 
        Some of this decline appears to have fed through to financial markets 
        in the form of lower risk premiums and higher asset valuations. To some 
        extent, the lack of a clear link between macroeconomic volatility and 
        the level of asset prices in existing research and models should not be 
        a surprise. Explaining asset prices is difficult because they are determined 
        by many complex factors, such as risk aversion, expected future earnings, 
        and expected earnings volatility, which are inherently difficult to measure.

[SECTION]

A more concrete finding is that the decline in macroeconomic volatility 
        has not led to a decline in asset price volatility. News about corporate 
        earnings appears to have become less volatile, but this factor explains 
        only a small part of the reduction in the volatility of asset prices. 
        Rather, existing research suggests that asset price volatility remains 
        largely a reflection of variation in investors' discount rates rather 
        than of changes in forecasts of fundamentals. On a micro level, financial 
        innovations and new types of market participants appear to have led to 
        greater market efficiency and liquidity. Still, growing pains in the markets 
        are inevitable, and policymakers need to watch financial markets carefully 
        for any warning signs that may appear. It certainly feels like market 
        liquidity, investor behavior, and asset price volatility are more important 
        considerations for policymakers now than they were decades ago. That said, 
        the benefits of a more efficient financial system seem to me and most 
        others to outweigh the costs.

[SECTION]

From my perspective as a policymaker, the lesson I take from these developments 
        is that the best course of action is good preparation for potential problems. 
        First and foremost is maintaining low and stable inflation. Inflation 
        expectations that are well anchored provide policymakers much greater 
        flexibility to respond as unexpected events unfold in financial markets. 
        Second, policymakers need to encourage sound risk management by private 
        market participants because that is the primary line of defense against 
        financial instability. Supervisors should create incentives for sound 
        risk management at supervised institutions, and central banks should ensure 
        that the infrastructure of financial markets, especially arrangements 
        to clear and settle financial market transactions, is subject to robust 
        risk management.

[SECTION]

In conclusion, a policymaker today probably has a different perspective 
        on the world compared with that of a policymaker forty years ago, long 
        before the Great Moderation. Without targeting asset prices, we need to 
        be more attentive now to financial markets because asset prices affect 
        spending to a greater degree than before and because asset prices provide 
        us with a greater amount of timely information to guide policy. Moreover, 
        we have become an even more receptive audience for research that enables 
        us to better understand the links between the real economy and financial 
        asset prices. It is for that reason that I wish to thank the Banco de 
        Mexico for giving me an opportunity to participate in this conference.

[SECTION]

