Panel discussion:  What Have We Learned Since October 1979?

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

The question
asked of this panel is, "What have we learned since October 1979?" The
evidence suggests that we have learned quite a bit. Most notably, monetary
policy-makers, political leaders, and the public have been persuaded by two
decades of experience that low and stable inflation has very substantial economic
benefits.

[SECTION]

This consensus marks
a considerable change from the views held by many economists at the time that
Paul Volcker became Fed Chairman. In 1979, most economists would have agreed that,
in principle, low inflation promotes economic growth and efficiency in the long
run. However, many also believed that, in the range of inflation rates
typically experienced by industrial countries, the benefits of low inflation
are probably small--particularly when set against the short-run costs of a
major disinflation, as the United States faced at that time. Indeed, some
economists would have held that low-inflation policies would likely prove
counterproductive even in the long run, if an increased focus on inflation inhibited
monetary policy-makers from responding adequately to fluctuations in economic
activity and employment.

[SECTION]

As it turned out, the
low-inflation era of the past two decades has seen not only significant
improvements in economic growth and productivity but also a marked reduction
in economic volatility, both in the United States and abroad, a phenomenon that
has been dubbed "the Great Moderation." Recessions have become less
frequent and milder, and quarter-to-quarter volatility in output and employment
has declined significantly as well. The sources of the Great Moderation remain
somewhat controversial, but as I have argued elsewhere, there is evidence for
the view that improved control of inflation has contributed in important
measure to this welcome change in the economy (Bernanke, 2004). Paul Volcker and
his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee deserve enormous credit
both for recognizing the crucial importance of achieving low and stable
inflation and for the courage and perseverance with which they tackled America's
critical inflation problem.

[SECTION]

I could say much
more about Volcker's achievement and its lasting benefits, but I am sure that
many other speakers will cover that ground. Instead, in my remaining time, I
will focus on some lessons that economists have drawn from the Volcker regime regarding
the importance of credibility in central banking and how that credibility can
be obtained. As usual, the views I will express are my own and are not
necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.

[SECTION]

Volcker could not
have accomplished what he did, of course, had he not been appointed to the
chairmanship by President Jimmy Carter. In retrospect, however, Carter's appointment
decision seems at least a bit incongruous. Why would the President appoint as
head of the central bank an individual whose economic views and policy goals
(not to mention personal style) seemed, at least on the surface, quite
different from his own? However, not long into Volcker's term, a staff economist
at the Board of Governors produced a paper that explained why Carter's decision
may in fact have been quite sensible from the President's, and indeed the
society's, point of view. Although the question seems a narrow one, the
insights of the paper had far broader application; indeed, this research has substantially
advanced our understanding of the links among central bank credibility, central
bank structure, and the effectiveness of monetary policy.

[SECTION]

Insiders will have
already guessed that the Board economist to whom I refer is Kenneth Rogoff, currently
a professor of economics at Harvard, and that the paper in question is Ken's
1985 article, "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate
Monetary Target" (Rogoff, 1985).1
The insights of the Rogoff paper are well worth recalling today. Rather than
considering the paper in isolation, however, I will place it in the context of
two other classic papers on credibility and central bank design, an earlier
work by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott and a later piece by Carl Walsh. As I
proceed, I will note what I see to be the important lessons and the practical
implications of this line of research.2

[SECTION]

Central bankers
have long recognized at some level that the credibility of their pronouncements
matters. I think it is fair to say, however, that in the late 1960s and 1970s,
as the U.S. inflation crisis was building, economists and policymakers did not
fully understand or appreciate the determinants of credibility and its link to
policy outcomes. In 1977, however, Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott published
a classic paper, entitled "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans" (Kydland and Prescott, 1977), that provided the first
modern analysis of these issues.3
Specifically, Kydland and Prescott demonstrated why, in many situations, economic
outcomes will be better if policymakers are able to make credible commitments,
or promises, about certain aspects of the policies they will follow in the
future. "Credible" in this context means that the public believes
that the policymakers will keep their promises, even if they face incentives to
renege.

[SECTION]

In particular, as
one of Kydland and Prescott's examples illustrates, monetary policy-makers will
generally find it advantageous to commit publicly to following policies that
will produce low inflation. If the policymakers' statements are believed (that
is, if they are credible), then the public will expect inflation to be low, and
demands for wage and price increases should accordingly be moderate. In a
virtuous circle, this cooperative behavior by the public makes the central bank's
commitment to low inflation easier to fulfill. In contrast, if the public is
skeptical of the central bank's commitment to low inflation (for example, if it
believes that the central bank may give in to the temptation to overstimulate
the economy for the sake of short-term employment gains), then the public's
inflation expectations will be higher than they otherwise would be. Expectations
of high inflation lead to more-aggressive wage and price demands, which make
achieving and maintaining low inflation more difficult and costly (in terms of
lost output and employment) for the central bank.

[SECTION]

Providing a clear
explanation of why credibility is important for effective policymaking, as
Kydland and Prescott did, was an important step. However, these authors
largely left open the critical issue of how a central bank is supposed to
obtain credibility in the first place. Here is where Rogoff's seminal article
took up the thread.4
Motivated by the example of Carter and Volcker, Rogoff's paper showed
analytically why even a president who is not particularly averse to inflation,
or at least no more so than the average member of the general public, might
find it in his interest to appoint a well-known "inflation hawk" to
head the central bank. The benefit of appointing a hawkish central banker is
the increased inflation-fighting credibility that such an appointment brings.
The public is certainly more likely to believe an inflation hawk when he
promises to contain inflation because they understand that, as someone who is
intrinsically averse to inflation, he is unlikely to renege on his commitment.
As increased credibility allows the central bank to achieve low inflation at a
smaller cost than a non-credible central bank can, the president may well find,
somewhat paradoxically, that he prefers the economic outcomes achieved under
the hawkish central banker to those that could have been obtained under a
central banker with views closer to his own and those of the public.

[SECTION]

Appointing an
inflation hawk to head the central bank may not be enough to ensure credibility
for monetary policy, however. As Rogoff noted in his article, for this
strategy to confer significant credibility benefits, the central bank must be
perceived by the public as being sufficiently independent from the rest of the
government to be immune to short-term political pressures. Thus Rogoff's proposed
strategy was really two-pronged: The appointment of inflation-averse central
bankers must be combined with measures to ensure central bank independence. These
ideas, supported by a great deal of empirical work, have proven highly influential.5
Indeed, the credibility benefits of central bank autonomy have been widely
recognized in the past twenty years, not only in the academic literature but,
far more consequentially, in the real-world design of central banking
institutions. For example, in the United Kingdom, the euro area, Japan, and
numerous other places, recent legislation or other government action has
palpably strengthened the independence of the central banks.6

[SECTION]

Rogoff's proposed
solution to the credibility problems of central banks does have some
limitations, however, as Ken recognized both in his paper and in subsequent
work. First, although an inflation-averse central banker enhances credibility
and delivers lower inflation on average, he may not respond to shocks to the
economy in the socially desirable way. For example, faced with an aggregate
supply shock (such as a sharp rise in oil prices), an inflation-averse central
banker will tend to react too aggressively (from society's point of view) to
contain the inflationary impact of the shock, with insufficient attention to
the consequences of his policy for output and employment.7
Second, contrary to an assumption of Rogoff's paper, in practice the policy
preferences of a newly appointed central banker will not be precisely known by
the public but must be inferred from policy actions. (Certainly the public's
perceptions of Chairman Volcker's views and objectives evolved over time.)
Knowing that the public must make such inferences might tempt a central banker
to misrepresent the state of the economy (Canzoneri, 1985) or even to take
suboptimal policy decisions; for example, the central banker may feel compelled
to tighten policy more aggressively than is warranted in order to convince the
public of his determination to fight inflation. The public's need to infer the
central banker's policy preferences may even generate increased economic
instability, as has been shown in a lively recent literature on the macroeconomic
consequences of learning.8

[SECTION]

The third
pathbreaking paper I will mention today, a 1995 article by Carl Walsh entitled "Optimal
Contracts for Central Bankers," was an attempt to address both of these issues.9
To do so, Walsh conducted a thought experiment. He asked his readers to
imagine that the government or society could offer the head of the central bank
a performance contract, one that includes explicit monetary rewards or
penalties that depend on the economic outcomes that occur under his watch.
Remarkably, Walsh showed that, in principle, a relatively simple contract
between the government and the central bank would lead to the implementation of
monetary policies that would be both credible and fully optimal. Under this
contract, the government provides the central banker with a base level of
compensation but then applies a penalty that depends on the realized rate of
inflation--the higher the observed inflation rate, the greater the penalty.

[SECTION]

If the public
understands the nature of the contract, and if the penalty assessed for
permitting inflation is large enough to affect central bank behavior, the
existence of the contract would give credence to central bank promises to keep
the inflation rate low (that is, the contract would provide credibility).10
Walsh's contract has in common with Rogoff's approach the idea that, in a
world of imperfect credibility, giving the central banker an objective function
that differs from the true objectives of society may be useful. However, Walsh
also shows that the contracting approach ameliorates the two problems
associated with Rogoff's approach. First, under the Walsh contract, the
central banker has incentives not only to achieve the target rate of inflation
but also to respond in the socially optimal manner to supply shocks.11
Second, as the inflation objective and the central banker's incentive scheme
are made explicit by the contract, the public's problem of inferring the
central banker's policy preferences is significantly reduced.

[SECTION]

There have been a
few attempts in the real world to implement an incentive contract for central
bankers--most famously a plan proposed to the New Zealand legislature, though
never adopted, which provided for firing the governor of the central bank if
the inflation rate deviated too far from the government's inflation objective.12
But Walsh's contracts are best treated as a metaphor rather than as a literal
proposal for central bank reform. Although the pay of central bankers is
unlikely ever to depend directly on the realized rate of inflation, central
bankers, like most people, care about many other aspects of their jobs,
including their professional reputations, the prestige of the institutions in
which they serve, and the probability that they will be reappointed.

[SECTION]

Walsh's analysis
and many subsequent refinements by other authors suggest that central bank
performance might be improved if the government set explicit performance
standards for the central bank (perhaps as part of the institution's charter or
enabling legislation) and regularly compared objectives and outcomes. Alternatively,
because central banks may possess the greater expertise in determining what
economic outcomes are both feasible and most desirable, macroeconomic goals
might be set through a joint exercise of the government and the central bank.
Many countries have established targets for inflation, for example, and central
bankers in those countries evidently make strong efforts to attain those
targets. The Federal Reserve Act does not set quantitative goals for the U.S.
central bank, but it does specify the objectives of price stability and maximum
sustainable employment and requires the central bank to present semi-annual
reports to the Congress on monetary policy and the state of the economy.
Accountability to the public as well as to the legislature is also important;
for this reason, the central bank should explain regularly what it is trying to
achieve and why. In sum, Walsh's paper can be read as providing theoretical
support for an explicit, well-designed, and transparent framework for monetary
policy, one which sets forth the objectives of policy and holds central bankers
accountable for reaching those objectives (or, at least, for providing a
detailed and plausible explanation of why the objectives were missed).

[SECTION]

In the simple
model that Walsh analyzes, the optimal contract provides all the incentives
needed to induce the best possible monetary policy, so that appointing a hawkish
central banker is no longer beneficial. However, in practice--because Walsh's
optimal contracts can be roughly approximated at best, because both the
incentives and the policy decisions faced by central bankers are far more
complex than can be captured by simple models, and because the appointment of
an inflation-averse central banker may provide additional assurance to the
public that the government and the central bank will keep their promises--the
Walsh approach and the Rogoff approach are almost certainly complementary.13
That is, a clear, well-articulated monetary policy framework; inflation-averse
central bankers; and autonomy for central banks in the execution of policy are
all likely to contribute to increased central bank credibility and hence better
policy outcomes. Of course, other factors that I could not cover in this short
review, such as the central bank's reputation for veracity as established over
time, may also strengthen its credibility (Barro and Gordon, 1983b; Backus and
Driffill, 1985).14

[SECTION]

Let me end where I
began, with reference to Paul Volcker and his contributions. I have discussed
today how Volcker's personality and performance inspired one seminal piece of
research about the determinants of central bank credibility. In focusing on a
few pieces of academic research, however, I have greatly understated the impact
of the Volcker era on views about central banking. The Volcker disinflation (and
analogous episodes in the United Kingdom, Canada, and elsewhere) was
undoubtedly a major catalyst for an explosion of fresh thinking by economists
and policymakers about central bank credibility, how it is obtained, and its benefits
for monetary policy-making. Over the past two decades, this new thinking has
contributed to a wave of changes in central banking, particularly with respect
to the institutional design of central banks and the establishment of new
frameworks for the making of monetary policy.

[SECTION]

Ironically, the applicability
of the ideas stimulated by the Volcker chairmanship to the experience of the U.S.
economy under his stewardship remains unclear. Though the appointment of
Volcker undoubtedly increased the credibility of the Federal Reserve, the
Volcker disinflation was far from a costless affair, being associated with a
minor recession in 1980 and a deep recession in 1981-82.15
Evidently, Volcker's personal credibility notwithstanding, Americans' memories
of the inflationary 1970s were too fresh for their inflation expectations to
change quickly. It is difficult to know whether alternative tactics would have
helped; for example, the announcement of explicit inflation objectives (which
would certainly have been a radical idea at the time) might have helped guide
inflation expectations downward more quickly, but they might also have created
a political backlash that would have doomed the entire effort. Perhaps no
policy approach or set of institutional arrangements could have eliminated the
1970s inflation at a lower cost than was actually incurred. If so, then the
significance of Paul Volcker's appointment was not its immediate effect on
expectations or credibility but rather the fact that he was one of the rare
individuals tough enough and with sufficient foresight to do what had to be
done. By doing what was necessary to achieve price stability, the Volcker Fed
laid the groundwork for two decades, so far, of strong economic performance.

[SECTION]

Backus, David, and John Driffill (1985). "Inflation and
Reputation," American Economic Review (75), June, pp. 530-8.

[SECTION]

Barro, Robert, and David Gordon (1983a). "A Positive
Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model," Journal of
Political Economy (91), pp. 589-610.

[SECTION]

Barro, Robert, and David Gordon (1983b). "Rules,
Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy," Journal of
Monetary Economics (12), pp. 101-21.

[SECTION]

Bernanke, Ben (2004). "The Great Moderation,"
remarks before the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.

[SECTION]

Calvo, Guillermo (1978). "On the Time Consistency of
the Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy," Econometrica (46),
November, pp. 1411-28.

[SECTION]

Canzoneri, Matthew (1985). "Monetary Policy Games and
the Role of Private Information," American Economic Review (75),
September, pp. 547-64.

[SECTION]

Erceg, Christopher, and Andrew Levin (2001). "Imperfect
Credibility and Inflation Persistence," Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series, 2001-45 (October).

[SECTION]

Evans, George, and Seppo Honkopohja (2001). Learning and
Expectations in Macroeconomics. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University
Press.

[SECTION]

Herrendorf, Berthold, and Ben Lockwood (1997). "Rogoff's
'Conservative' Central Banker Restored," Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking (29), November, pp. 476-95.

[SECTION]

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott (1977). "Rules
Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of
Political Economy (85), June, pp. 473-92.

[SECTION]

Lohmann, Suzanne (1992). "Optimal Commitment in
Monetary Policy: Credibility versus Flexibility," American Economic
Review (82), March, pp. 273-86.

[SECTION]

Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (forthcoming).
"Imperfect Knowledge, Inflation Expectations, and Monetary Policy," in
B. Bernanke and M. Woodford, eds., The Inflation Targeting Debate. Chicago,
 Ill.: University of Chicago Press for NBER.

[SECTION]

Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini (1993). "Designing
Institutions for Monetary Stability," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy (39), pp. 53-84.

[SECTION]

Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of
Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target," Quarterly Journal of
Economics (100), November, pp. 1169-89.

[SECTION]

Rogoff, Kenneth (1987). "Reputational Constraints on
Monetary Policy," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy (26), pp. 141-82.

[SECTION]

Svensson, Lars (1997). "Optimal Inflation Contracts, 'Conservative'
Central Banks, and Linear Inflation Contracts," American Economic
Review (87), March, pp. 98-114.

[SECTION]

Walsh, Carl (1995). "Optimal Contracts for Central
Bankers," American Economic Review (85), March, pp. 150-67.

[SECTION]

Walsh, Carl (2003). Monetary Theory and Policy, 2nd
ed. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

[SECTION]



[SECTION]

Footnotes

[SECTION]

[T]he paper was
mainly written at the Board in 1982 . . . It came out as an IMF working paper
in February 1983 (I was visiting there), and then the same version came out as
an International Finance Discussion paper [at the Board of Governors] in
September 1983 . . . The original version of the paper . . . featured inflation
targeting. Much like the published paper, I suggested that having an
independent central bank can be a solution to the time consistency [that is,
credibility] problem if we give the bank an intermediate target and some
(unspecified) incentive to hit the target . . . I had the conservative central
banker idea in there as well, as one practical way to ensure the central bank
placed a high weight on inflation. Larry Summers, my editor at the [Quarterly
Journal of Economics], urged me to move that idea up to the front section
and place inflation targeting second. This, of course, is how the paper ended
up.

[SECTION]

[Regarding the
Fed], Dale Henderson and Matt Canzoneri liked the paper very much . . . many
other researchers gave me feedback on my paper (including Peter Tinsley, Ed
Offenbacher, Bob Flood, Jo Anna Gray, and many others) . . . Last but perhaps
most important, there is absolutely no doubt that the paper was inspired by my
experience watching the Volcker Fed at close range. I never would have written
it had I not . . . ended up as an economist at the Board.

[SECTION]

Return 
        to top

[SECTION]

2004 Speeches